===== INLINE COMMENT =====
See attached file(s)

===== ATTACHMENT 1: FNS-2021-0038-0050_attachment_1.pdf =====
--- PAGE 1 ---
Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights

Breandan G. Magee
Senior Director of Programs
Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights
228 South Wabash Avenue, Suite 800
Chicago, IL 60604

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 
WIC Modernization and Delivery 
  
When considering changes to the WIC program, we would suggest that the following areas of 
focus should be forefront in policy makers’ minds: the clients’ cultural background, their specific 
needs, and their limitations. 
  
Low-income WIC clients (specifically mothers who receive WIC benefits) encounter an array of 
challenges that prohibit their continued enrollment in the WIC program over a period of years. 
Some of these factors include: long work hours, addressing the needs of their other children, lack 
of transportation, unavailability during WIC office business hours, and being unable to attend the 
nutritional classes provided by WIC. 
  
The Center should evaluate the needs of the WIC state agency by concentrating on the 
population of each state and their disparate cultural backgrounds. Due to the limited culturally 
appropriate ingredients in the WIC food lists, ethnic communities often encounter difficulty 
determining how to cook using the food in the Authorized WIC Food List. In fact, many clients 
only use very specific items from the list. Expanding and including a greater variety of culturally 
appropriate food will help clients to continue to claim their WIC benefits. Additionally, 
expanding access to locations where foods can be purchased would also be an important step in 
the sustainability of the WIC program. Lastly, expanding the eligibility requirements for clients 
to continue their WIC benefits would go a long way in keeping clients enrolled. 
  
The Center should also have WIC information and guidelines in multiple languages that address 
the language needs of each state. In Illinois, for example, *the top five languages spoken are 
Spanish, Polish, Chinese, Tagalog, and Arabic. It is pivotal to share information, best practices, 
or other issues that impact the customer experience in a minimum of the top five languages 
spoken. 
  
To define and measure success, The Center ought to determine precisely why clients disenroll or 
discontinue using WIC benefits. Comparing the number of people applying for WIC benefits to 
how long they use the benefits will create data points to analyze rates of disenrollment. 
Oftentimes clients will apply for WIC benefits to receive milk formula, however, given the 
burdensome requirements of the program, they disenroll as soon as their child stops drinking the 
formula. Even though WIC is a supplementary nutritional program, clients often prefer to only 
receive SNAP (due to fewer restrictions).  When participating in the SNAP program, clients may 
purchase food at a variety of locations and they are not required to participate in additional 
nutritional classes. 
  
To conclude, one must secure stakeholders' input to best design the modernization and improved 
delivery of the WIC program itself.

--- PAGE 3 ---
3 
 
*“The Demographic Statistical Atlas of the United States - Statistical Atlas.” The Demographic 
Statistical Atlas of the United States - Statistical Atlas, 
https://statisticalatlas.com/state/Illinois/Languages. Accessed 8 Dec. 2021.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 
Illinois Coalition for Immigrant and Refugee Rights (ICIRR) 
 
ICIRR is dedicated to promoting the rights of immigrants and refugees to full and equal 
participation in the civic, cultural, social, and political life of our diverse society.